Learning methods are very often requested in the data mining domain. The learning methods aim to generate a prediction model 3 from a learning sample a Ð . The model brought about is more or less reliable. This reliability is generally evaluated with a posteriori test sample a Ø . The reliability depends on the learning sample, on the underlying statistical hypothesis, and many others factors. Nevertheless, it may happen that no method exist that produce a reliable model. This can be explained by the following reasons:
 ̄ the methods are not suitable to the problem we are trying to learn, we have thus to look for another more appropriate one;
 ̄ the classes are not separable in the learning space. In this case, it is impossible to find a better learning method.
It will be very interesting to use mathematical tools that can characterize the class separability from a given learning sample. There already exist measures for learnability such as the VC-dimension provided by the statistical learning theory (Vapnik 1998).
Nevertheless, VC-dimension is difficult to compute in many cases. This problem has also been studied based on a statistical approach by Rao (Rao 1972). Kruskal and Wallis have defined a nonparametric test based on an equality hypothesis of the scale parameters (Aivazian, Enukov, and Mechalkine 1986). Recently, Sebban (Sebban 1996) and Zighed (Zighed and Sebban 1999) have proposed a test based on the number of edges that connect examples of different classes in a geometrical neighbourhood. At first, they build a multidimensional neighbourhood structure by using some particular models like the Toussaint’s Relative Neighbourhood Graph (Toussaint 1980). Theycalculate thereafter the number of edges that must be removed from the neighbourhood graph to obtain clusters of homogeneous points in a given class. Finally, they have established the law of the edge proportion that must be removed under the null hypothesis, denoted À 1⁄4 , of a random distribution of the labels. With this law, they can say if classes are separable or not by calculating the p-value of the test –e.g., the probability of having a computed value as important as the observed value under À 1⁄4 . We propose in this paper a theoretical framework and a nonparametric statistic that takes into consideration the weight of the removed edges. We exploit the works of the spatial autocorrelation, in particular the join-counts statistic, presented by Cliff and Ord (Cliff and Ord 1986) following the works of Moran (Moran 1948), Krishna Iyer (Krishna Iyer 1949), Geary (Geary 1954) and David (David 1971). Such process has been studied in the classification domain by Lebart (Lebart 2000) who used works based on the spatial contiguity, like Geary’s contiguity coefficient, to compare the local structures vs.the global structures in a nearest neighbour graph.
